welcome to topcast and question five
or rather a question for david number
five
in my conversation that i had with david
deutch i'm going to release the entire
thing eventually
once i've got all the other questions
put together i like doing it an episode
at a time because i've been
oh let's face it inspired by naval to do
so today i'm asking david about one of
my
favorite topics which is optimism about
human beings the contrast between the
way in which the david deutsch
worldview the worldview presented in the
beginning infinity
contrasts with so much of what passes
for
serious intellectual discussion about
the place of
people on our planet and in our cosmos
surprisingly perhaps being pro-human
isn't popular i don't just mean in the
sense that it's
not common it's certainly not the
majority opinion i also mean it isn't
popular in the sense
that people will get quite emotional
negatively emotional
if you make the case that people are
special it's a curious kind of spiritual
as well as philosophical inversion it
used to be
the case of course that human beings
thought
they were the center of the universe not
just physically but
philosophically and theologically the
entirety
of the cosmos was put there for us in a
sense
we're the reason the universe exists the
three
big monotheisms judaism christianity and
islam
teach or at least taught to some extent
some version of this to a lesser extent
other religions
to the extent they teach magical
thinking just as monotheistic religions
do
also teach some version of the you are
special lesson
this is it should be said a good thing
in the main the underlying motivation is
good
religions are vast collections of ideas
of memes in fact
and while many of the ideas are false or
what we might call
poor explanations when there are good
explanations
actually on offer in many cases some of
the underlying motivations for religion
exist to give people direction in their
lives especially when things might seem
hopeless or without direction or without
point
in other words they provide some answer
to
nihilism to the nameless void friedrich
nietzsche it is known
wrote that famous quote if you gaze
long enough into an abyss the abyss will
gaze back
into you which is frightening taken
seriously
in other words if you take too long
thinking about the pointlessness of life
the abyss you will eventually find that
pointless abyss that void
and it might fill you up what is often
not
quoted in that particular quip is the
sentence that comes immediately
prior so i quote again from nietzsche
quote whoever fights monsters
should see to it that in the process he
does not
become a monster end quote which is to
say
if one devotes their time to combating
bad ideas
one should be careful not to become a
vessel for them
this is the purpose therefore of
religion it is not supposed to be solely
a critical exercise of pointing out
everything that's bad it's supposed to
give you
positive content something that is good
to replace
what might otherwise be the void in your
life or the bad ideas that could fill up
your mind
it is not supposed to be a purely
critical condemning
exercise one is not supposed to go
around condemning
others for their sins one is not
supposed to be pointing out all the
evils in the world constantly
jesus christ got there before nietzsche
of course with paraphrasing whoever is
without sin
cast the first stone or remove the log
from your own eye before being concerned
with the speck in your brothers
the point there is criticism without
creativity
is a kind of cruelty creativity without
criticism
can lead to complete nonsense we need
both
jettisoning completely giving up on
religious thinking
wholesale is no guide to life like
literally no guide to life if you're
just
throwing away religion and not jumping
to something better
that's not a guide to life religion
purports to be
a guide to life so if you have nothing
else to replace it
if you have literally nihilism or just
atheism that's no way to run your life
but is there something better well this
is the kind of thing that philosophy is
supposed to do for you
at its best if you give up religion
without
having anywhere better to jump to you'll
be left
with the nameless void criticism alone
is like being worried about the specs in
the eyes of everyone around you
while not being concerned about the log
blinding you yourself
and it's also like constantly and
deliberately casting stones
without primarily trying to create
uplift and build
its destruction versus construction
what on earth am i getting at why have i
gone all new age preacher
because i think that there has been a
turn in the last few decades in
particular
in philosophy in intellectual circles
towards the critical leaving us with
nothing but be nihilistic
with little thought for what might
replace what has been refuted
the analogy to physics is appealing here
whenever
anyone says some observation does not
fit with einstein's relativity
which is the prevailing theory of space
and time and motion and
gravity that kind of thing people jump
to especially in the popular media
so einstein has been proved wrong or
shown wrong or something like that
the problem with this is that if indeed
some experimental result did not agree
with einstein's relativity
then what then what is it true that the
beautiful theory would be slain by an
ugly fact
or as feynman said if it disagrees with
experiment it is wrong
that it's all there is to it sadly
even in the case of feynman there taken
very narrowly
that's wrong the fact is that the only
way
to replace an idea or to show an idea is
wrong
is to have another idea there waiting in
the wings to replace it
you need at least two ideas the purpose
of the observation or the experiment
is to rule out one of them leaving you
with another you can't have the single
only idea that you have guiding yourself
whether it's in science or anywhere else
being refuted and leaving you with
nothing leaving you with
nihilism in that area avoid the abyss
we always need to be improving making
progress
and progress does not only come by
criticism
it comes by creativity as well via a
positive vision
about how we improve our ideas and this
is true in science we know how it works
in science
via experimental refutation but more
broadly
when we think about something grand like
the place of
people in the cosmos we can't simply say
people are no longer the center of the
universe and are just inhabiting
the outer suburbs of a very typical
galaxy and therefore we are irrelevant
to the rest of the universe
making us feel as though we don't have a
particular place
in the universe we need somewhere better
to jump to
so if we find for example as so many do
that the entire content of our religious
corpus of knowledge our traditions and
our culture that has been
handed down don't agree in some sense
because of what the holy books contain
with what we understand about physical
reality for example
everything in cosmology geology and
biology disagree with the literal
content of the holy scriptures
therefore the holy scriptures are wrong
in their entirety then what
what do we do to guide our actions do we
just make it up as we go along
can we then create without criticism
over the last few decades as i was
saying there has been an especially
vociferous
turn in intellectual circles of
rejecting god and then rejecting
all of religion and that includes the
notion that people are at the center of
anything in particular
that we are not special and that the
earth is not but is it true
that just because physical cosmology
tells us that the universe is
13.7 billion years old thus refuting the
claim that
it wasn't all created in seven days or 5
340 years
pick your religious cosmological theory
or that we know that the earth is not
the center of the universe
that therefore people are not important
or special
or as i like to say cosmically
significant
people today will praise and hold sacred
almost anything
but people they will devote their lives
to movements
regard the inert environment as
something worth dying for
all the while complaining that people
are evil or condemned or that
life is pointless ultimately nietzsche
might say they've been
staring into the abyss and the abyss has
stared back
they fight monsters only to become a
kind of monster themselves
of course the truth is that it's all
just ideas
people are not monsters they are people
people have ideas they are not filled
with a void
or filled with the abyss but they are
filled with ideas
and some of those ideas can be bad ideas
ideas for example that regard people is
bad
that people are a scum for example
i asked david about this broadly
speaking in an especially redundant way
as you'll hear
in which i'll have just a little bit
more to say about afterwards
that that would bring me to uh my next
question
um describing people for example as
chemical scum might be a very loose way
of understanding what people are but
hawking did it and
you have a an excellent refutation of
this
claim that stephen hawking did make
which seems to be the reasonably
scientific way of understanding our
place in the universe he said that we
are just a chemical scum
on the surface of a typical planet
orbiting a typical star and so on
but you say this place is not typical is
it in
in what sense isn't it typical i think
the the the
description of humans as a chemical scum
on earth is not accurate
in the problem situation in which
hawking used that
term it's we we are
certainly made of chemicals but so is
the rest of the earth
and so so is all other so is all other
matter
in the universe so to single us out
as a scum in
in these uh if you're going to
take these terms in the context of
trying to describe something purely in
terms in reductionist terms of their
constituents
then it is simply false
to add a pejorative term
that pejorative term comes from a
different problem situation
and uh a different vocabulary is needed
uh it would be enough to say we are
chemicals like everything else in the
universe
and then you see that it would be silly
to call the earth a chemical scum or the
sun or the solar system or the milky way
galaxy
as as a chemical scum though in the
sense in which we are it is too
so we are a a special a very special
kind of chemical but then
would that entail that the earth is
special by virtue of the fact that it is
uniquely suited to
ensuring that this set of chemicals
called us is able to survive off into
some future that we are only sustained
by the existence of
this planet and will only continue to be
sustained by this planet so therefore we
better look after the environment or
else
we're going to go extinct yeah so you're
you're putting that in
a in in a deliberately exaggerated way
that makes it much more wrong
you could have said that with one tenth
the emphasis and it would still be wrong
um now it's true that the earth is is
that living things can exist on earth
only by virtue of the fact that the
earth ex
provides uh by astronomical standards a
very
unusual set of circumstances which if
if they were to vary by astronomical
standards by
only a few percent then um
without a lot of technology we would die
and living things in general um
would die without technological help
but that doesn't at all mean that the
earth is adapted to human existence
or even through life but especially to
human existence
very accurately it it uh
it'd be more true to say that the earth
is barely suitable for life
uh it it provides
a relatively stable temperature and
sunlight and living things manage to
use that even though it's not very
conveniently provided
and that that took it hundreds of
millions of years to work out
and the rest was provided by life
itself and most of the rest as far as
humans
go was provided by humans
um there are very very few places
on earth that humans can live
comfortably um without technology
that is without ideas provided by them
and not provided by the earth so i don't
know
maybe some south sea islands with
suitable
coconuts or whatever they have there and
even that
would be a trap because we are so
constituted
that if we did live in such an
environment
for some generations our numbers would
increase
uh to the point when we will live where
we were living in misery again
so the the earth is where are living on
earth
what has been provided is really
just the bare necessities for us to live
somewhere originally the great lift rift
valley or something
and the rest has to be provided by us
yes so the earth is not adapted
to life but life can adapt itself
to the earth but the only thing that is
going to
survive in the long run in terms of
regular life not intelligent life like
ourselves
the genes the genes are going to want to
try and make themselves survive
and the animals won't care or the other
species
don't have this concept of caring into
the infinite future about their own
survival however
we do so we want to adapt ourselves
to the earth in some way or if not the
earth then something far
larger we want to adapt ourselves to the
universe in which we find ourselves
and the one thing that enables us to do
that is of course
solving our problems continually to
create the knowledge in order to enable
us to do so
so there we have it you heard david
there say that one of my questions could
have been said with
one tenth of the emphasis and it would
still be wrong
this is all because it is wrong to think
that the earth is especially suited to
us
this can be shocking for people to hear
but david likes to use the example of
oxford for example where he lives
is not suitable for human existence
remove the technology the stuff that's
there
only because of the knowledge of people
and that includes everything from
shoes and underwear and clothing all the
way through to
reverse cycle air conditioning and
refrigeration
and a person there in the winter
wouldn't last 10
minutes in the freezing cold people are
fragile and the only way we can get by
is in an environment that we construct
around ourselves
he mentions there maybe there are some
islands somewhere where you know
there's constantly fruits being produced
and there's animals there and it'd be
very comfortable for us to live
night and day wandering around without
clothes and without reverse cycle and
conditioning and without
perhaps refrigeration maybe we could get
by there for a few generations
until the storm comes until something
goes wrong
the only reason we're able to survive
ongoing on this planet
is because of our knowledge our
technology we
make places here on earth that are
otherwise completely inhospitable
hospitable in australia the the the
nation is essentially a desert well
not entirely but largely a desert and if
we didn't have dams for example
collecting the rainwater we'd quickly
die of first there's no way we could
support the
almost 25 million or 30 million people
that we have here on this extremely dry
continent repeat for every other
continent around the world as well
either it's too cold too dry
too wet too frozen just too dangerous
the earth is barely suitable barely
suitable
and because we are able to make it
increasingly more and more suitable
more and more friendly to humans human
friendly
we can do likewise with the rest of the
cosmos we've already done it in outer
space
we've already made the vacuum of space
where the international space station is
hospitable to some extent we can
continue to do that
we could do that on the moon we could do
that on mars and eventually we spread
out
throughout the solar system the galaxy
the
local group of galaxies and the universe
but it takes
lots more knowledge to create the
technology in order for us to do that
we've done it here let's keep
doing it off into the infinite future
people are unique we are special
we are the thing that makes the world
worth living in and possible to keep on
living in until my next question with
david
on my next episode bye